.TH ATTACHRACTL 1 "2026-07-15" "attachra" "Attachra Manual"
.SH NAME
attachractl \- command\-line client for the Attachra admin/automation REST API
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B attachractl
.RI [ global\ options ]
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ flags ]
.RI [ args ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B attachractl
drives a running Attachra instance entirely over its
.B /api/v1
REST API
.RI ( api/openapi.yaml
in the source tree is the contract of record) \(em it never touches the
metadata store or configuration file directly, and can run from any
host that can reach the Attachra API endpoint.
.PP
Commands are organized as
.IR command " " subcommand
pairs, e.g.
.B links list
or
.BR "token create" .
Every command except
.B version
requires a resolved API endpoint URL and bearer token (see
.B CONNECTION CONFIGURATION
below); a warning is printed to stderr whenever
.B \-\-insecure
disables TLS certificate verification.
.PP
By default, output is a human\-readable table or summary line; pass the
persistent
.B \-\-json
flag to get newline\-delimited, machine\-readable JSON instead (one
compact JSON object per matched resource for list\-shaped commands).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
These persistent flags apply to every command except
.BR version .
.TP
.BI \-\-config " file"
Path to the attachractl config file. Default:
.IR ~/.config/attachractl/config.yaml .
.TP
.BI \-\-url " url"
Attachra API base URL, e.g.
.IR https://attachra.example.com .
Also settable via the
.B ATTACHRACTL_URL
environment variable or the config file's
.B url
key.
.TP
.BI \-\-token\-file " file"
Path to a file containing the bearer token. The token is
.B never
accepted as a plain flag value, since a flag value is visible to other
local users via
.IR /proc/<pid>/cmdline " or " ps.
Also settable via the
.B ATTACHRACTL_TOKEN
environment variable (the raw token value, not a path) or the config
file's
.B token
/
.B token_file
keys.
.TP
.B \-\-insecure
Skip TLS certificate verification.
.B INSECURE \(em testing only.
Prints a warning to stderr whenever it takes effect (including via the
config file's
.B insecure
key).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output machine\-readable JSON (newline\-delimited, one object per
result) instead of a human\-readable table.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " duration"
Request timeout, in Go duration syntax (e.g.
.IR 30s ", " 2m ).
Default: 30s.
.SH CONNECTION CONFIGURATION
The API endpoint URL, bearer token and TLS verification setting are
each resolved independently with the following precedence, highest
first:
.IP 1. 4
Command\-line flags
.RB ( \-\-url ", " \-\-token\-file ", " \-\-insecure ).
.IP 2. 4
Environment variables
.RB ( ATTACHRACTL_URL ", " ATTACHRACTL_TOKEN ).
.IP 3. 4
The YAML config file
.RI ( \-\-config ,
default
.IR ~/.config/attachractl/config.yaml ).
.PP
A missing config file is not an error; a present\-but\-malformed one
is. See
.B FILES
below for the config file's shape.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "attachractl version"
Prints the client's own build metadata
.RI ( VERSION ", " COMMIT ", " DATE )
and exits. The only command exempt from connection resolution above
\(em no API call is made.
.SS "attachractl policy current"
Shows the currently active policy: name, version, rule count, default
action, and a table of every rule's name/action/disabled/reason.
Calls
.BR "GET /policies/current" .
.SS "attachractl policy validate file"
Sends the local YAML file at
.I file
to
.BR "POST /policies/validate" .
Prints every error and warning found; exits non\-zero
.RB ( exitValidation ", 7)"
if the document has errors, matching a CI gate's expectations.
.SS "attachractl policy reload"
Calls
.B "POST /policies/reload"
(admin\-only): re\-reads and re\-applies the server's configured
policy file from disk. If the file on disk fails to validate, the
server rejects the reload with 409 and the previously active policy
remains in effect.
.SS "attachractl policy dry\-run"
Calls
.B "POST /policies/dry\-run"
: a pure, side\-effect\-free simulation of what the active policy would
decide for a hypothetical message, without creating a message,
attachment, link or audit event.
.TP
.BI \-\-sender " address"
Envelope sender address.
.TP
.BI \-\-recipient " address"
Recipient address (repeatable).
.TP
.BI \-\-attachment " spec"
Attachment in
.RI \(dq filename:size[:mime_type[:detected_type]] \(dq
form (repeatable).
.TP
.BI \-f ", " \-\-file " file"
Read the full DryRunRequest JSON body from this file (or
.RB \(dq - \(dq
for stdin) instead of assembling one from
.BR \-\-sender / \-\-recipient / \-\-attachment .
.SS "attachractl links list"
Lists every link matching the given filters, automatically walking
every page of
.BR "GET /links" .
.TP
.BI \-\-message\-id " id"
Filter by message ID.
.TP
.BI \-\-recipient " address"
Filter by exact, case\-insensitive recipient address.
.TP
.BI \-\-status " status"
Filter by status: \fBactive\fR, \fBrevoked\fR, \fBexpired\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound on \fBcreated_at\fR (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound on \fBcreated_at\fR (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " n"
Page size requested per API call (server default 50, max 200);
auto\-pagination still fetches every page regardless.
.SS "attachractl links get link\-id"
Gets a single link by ID. Calls
.BR "GET /links/{id}" .
.SS "attachractl links revoke [link\-id]"
Revokes one link, every link of a message, or every link of a sender.
Exactly one of a positional
.IR link\-id ,
.B \-\-message\-id
or
.B \-\-sender
must be given. Revoking is admin\-only; a link under legal hold is
refused (single\-link mode) or reported as skipped (message/sender
cascade mode).
.TP
.BI \-\-message\-id " id"
Revoke every link belonging to this message.
.TP
.BI \-\-sender " address"
Revoke every link belonging to every message from this sender.
.SS "attachractl links hold link\-id"
.PD 0
.SS "attachractl links unhold link\-id"
.PD
Places a link under legal hold, or lifts one. Calls
.BR "POST /links/{id}/hold" " or " "POST /links/{id}/unhold" .
.SS "attachractl stats summary"
Aggregated message/policy/download statistics for a time window: calls
.BR "GET /stats/summary" .
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound of the window (RFC 3339, required).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound of the window (RFC 3339, required).
.SS "attachractl stats deliverability"
Link download\-rate statistics broken down by recipient domain, sorted
worst\-performing first by default; automatically walks every page of
.BR "GET /stats/deliverability" .
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound of the window (RFC 3339, required).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound of the window (RFC 3339, required).
.TP
.BI \-\-sort " key"
Sort key; only
.B download_rate
is supported.
.TP
.BI \-\-order " order"
Sort order:
.B asc
(default, worst first) or
.BR desc .
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " n"
Page size requested per API call (server default 50, max 200).
.SS "attachractl audit list"
Fetches audit log events. By default fetches a single page of
.BR "GET /audit" ;
pass
.B \-\-all
to auto\-paginate through every matching event instead.
.TP
.BI \-\-message\-id " id"
Filter by message ID.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " type"
Filter by audit event type.
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-cursor " token"
Opaque pagination cursor from a previous page.
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " n"
Page size (server default 50, max 200).
.TP
.B \-\-all
Auto\-paginate through every matching event instead of a single page.
.SS "attachractl audit tail"
Shows the most recent audit events, optionally following new ones.
Fetches the last
.B \-\-lines
matching events, then, with
.BR \-\-follow ,
polls for new events every
.BR \-\-interval .
.TP
.BI \-\-message\-id " id"
Filter by message ID.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " type"
Filter by audit event type.
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-lines " n"
Number of recent events to show. Default: 20.
.TP
.B \-\-follow
Keep running and print new events as they are recorded (exits cleanly
on SIGINT/SIGTERM).
.TP
.BI \-\-interval " duration"
Polling interval when
.B \-\-follow
is set. Default: 2s.
.SS "attachractl audit export"
Streams
.B "GET /audit/export"
directly to stdout without buffering: one JSON object per line, in
ascending sequence order, unaffected by
.BR \-\-json .
Unlike
.BR "audit list" / "audit tail" ,
this is not paginated \(em narrow the result with
.BR \-\-from / \-\-to / \-\-type .
.TP
.BI \-\-type " type"
Filter by audit event type.
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Inclusive lower bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Exclusive upper bound on timestamp (RFC 3339).
.SS "attachractl token create"
Calls
.B "POST /api-tokens"
(admin\-only). The response's secret is the only time the raw bearer
token is shown: it is printed to stdout on its own line so scripts can
capture it directly, e.g.:
.RS
.EX
attachractl token create \-\-name ci \-\-role viewer > token.secret
.EE
.RE
The id/name/role summary goes to stderr instead; neither is ever
logged.
.TP
.BI \-\-name " name"
Required. Operator\-chosen label for the token.
.TP
.BI \-\-role " role"
Required. One of \fBadmin\fR, \fBviewer\fR or \fBauditor\fR.
.SS "attachractl token list"
Lists every token's metadata (never a secret or hash), automatically
walking every page of
.BR "GET /api-tokens" .
.TP
.BI \-\-limit " n"
Page size requested per API call (server default 50, max 200).
.SS "attachractl token revoke token\-id"
Calls
.B "DELETE /api-tokens/{tokenId}"
(admin\-only). Takes effect immediately.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Unexpected/internal failure (network, decode, bug).
.TP
.B 2
Bad arguments, or the API rejected the request as malformed (HTTP 400).
.TP
.B 3
HTTP 401: missing or invalid bearer token.
.TP
.B 4
HTTP 403: the token's role may not perform this action.
.TP
.B 5
HTTP 404: no such resource.
.TP
.B 6
HTTP 409: e.g. a link under legal hold, or an invalid policy on reload.
.TP
.B 7
.B policy validate
found errors in the submitted document.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ATTACHRACTL_URL
Attachra API base URL. Overridden by
.BR \-\-url ;
overrides the config file's
.B url
key.
.TP
.B ATTACHRACTL_TOKEN
Raw bearer token value. Overridden by
.BR \-\-token\-file ;
overrides the config file's
.B token
/
.B token_file
keys.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/attachractl/config.yaml
Default config file
.RI ( \-\-config
overrides the path). YAML with optional keys
.BR url ", " token ", " token_file " and " insecure .
Prefer
.B token_file
(or
.BR ATTACHRACTL_TOKEN )
over inline
.B token
so the secret lives in a file whose permissions the operator controls
independently of this config file. Example:
.RS
.EX
url: https://attachra.example.com
token_file: /run/secrets/attachractl-token
insecure: false
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR attachra (1),
.BR attachra.yaml (5)
.SH AUTHOR
The Attachra Project <https://attachra.org>.
