.TH ATTACHRA.YAML 5 "2026-07-15" "attachra" "Attachra Manual"
.SH NAME
attachra.yaml \- configuration file for the attachra attachment policy engine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/attachra/attachra.yaml
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B attachra.yaml
is a YAML document read by
.BR attachra (1)
via its
.B \-\-config
flag. Every key is optional; an omitted key keeps the built\-in default
listed below. Keys not recognized here are ignored.
.PP
Before parsing, any
.RI \(dq ${ENV_VAR} \(dq
placeholder appearing anywhere in the raw file text is substituted
with the value of the corresponding process environment variable. A
placeholder referencing an
.B unset
variable is left unchanged (never silently replaced with an empty
string), so a typo does not silently coerce a secret into an empty
value. This is the recommended way to keep secrets (S3 keys, etc.) out
of an otherwise world\-readable configuration file \(em see
.BR attachra (1)
.B FILES
for the packaged
.I attachra.env
mechanism this pairs with.
.PP
After substitution and parsing, every key listed below can additionally
be overridden by an
.B ATTACHRA_
\-prefixed environment variable (see
.B ENVIRONMENT
below); this is a separate mechanism from the
.RI \(dq ${ENV_VAR} \(dq
substitution above and applies whether or not a config file is used at
all. There is no
.RB \(dq "attachra config validate" \(dq
subcommand: an invalid file makes the process exit 1 immediately,
before it binds any listener, so check the process's log output (or
.RB \(dq "journalctl -u attachra -e" \(dq
under the packaged systemd unit) for the specific validation error.
.SH KEYS
.SS "log"
Logger settings.
.TP
.B log.level
One of
.BR debug ", " info ", " warn ", " error .
Default:
.BR info .
.TP
.B log.format
One of
.B json
or
.BR text .
Default:
.BR text .
.SS "milter"
Postfix milter adapter settings.
.TP
.B milter.listen
Milter listen address, in Postfix milter syntax, e.g.
.RI \(dq inet:127.0.0.1:6785 \(dq
or
.RI \(dq unix:/var/run/attachra.sock \(dq .
Must not be empty. Default:
.RI \(dq inet:127.0.0.1:6785 \(dq .
.TP
.B milter.failure_mode
One of
.B open
or
.BR closed .
.B open
accepts a message unmodified when Attachra encounters an error or
panic while processing it;
.B closed
temp\-fails it (SMTP 4xx) so the sending MTA retries later. Default:
.BR open .
.SS "http"
Download adapter (public package/download page) settings.
.TP
.B http.listen
TCP address the download server binds to, e.g.
.RI \(dq 127.0.0.1:8080 \(dq .
Must not be empty. Default:
.RI \(dq 127.0.0.1:8080 \(dq .
.TP
.B http.trusted_proxies
List of CIDR ranges (IPv4 and/or IPv6, e.g.
.RI \(dq 127.0.0.1/32 \(dq
or
.RI \(dq 10.0.0.0/8 \(dq )
of reverse proxies allowed to set the client identity via
.B X\-Forwarded\-For
/
.BR X\-Real\-IP .
Default: empty, meaning no proxy is trusted and the TCP peer address
is always used \(em a deployment that puts a reverse proxy in front of
Attachra must opt in explicitly by listing that proxy's address here.
.SS "http.rate_limit"
Per\-IP and global request throttling plus the not\-found\-response
tarpit, for the download adapter. Every
.I *_per_minute
field is a sustained\-rate token\-bucket budget; a value \(<= 0
disables that specific limit.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.per_ip_per_minute
Sustained request rate allowed for a single client IP across all
routes. Default: 120.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.per_ip_burst
Maximum short burst size for a single client IP. 0 defaults to
.BR per_ip_per_minute .
Default: 20.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.global_per_minute
Sustained request rate allowed across all clients combined. Default:
6000.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.global_burst
Maximum short burst size across all clients combined. 0 defaults to
.BR global_per_minute .
Default: 200.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.not_found_per_ip_per_minute
Tighter sustained rate for a single IP's requests that resolve to the
generic not\-found/expired/revoked/exhausted response (the signature of
token enumeration). Exceeding it triggers the tarpit delay on further
responses to that IP. Default: 20.
.TP
.B http.rate_limit.tarpit_delay_seconds
Artificial delay, in seconds (may be fractional, e.g. 0.5), added to a
not\-found\-shaped response once an IP has exceeded
.BR not_found_per_ip_per_minute .
Default: 1.0.
.SS "limits"
Global resource limits enforced across milter session handling, MIME
parsing and HTTP serving. All fields below must be positive.
.TP
.B limits.max_message_size
Maximum accepted size, in bytes, of an entire email message (headers +
body). Default: 104857600 (100 MiB).
.TP
.B limits.max_attachment_size
Maximum accepted size, in bytes, of a single MIME part/attachment.
Default: 26214400 (25 MiB).
.TP
.B limits.max_mime_parts
Maximum number of MIME parts (leaf and container) a message may
contain before parsing is aborted. Default: 1000.
.TP
.B limits.max_mime_depth
Maximum nesting depth of MIME multipart/message containers before
parsing is aborted. Default: 20.
.TP
.B limits.max_header_bytes
Maximum total size, in bytes, of a message's header block. Default:
1048576 (1 MiB).
.TP
.B limits.milter_max_connections
Maximum number of concurrent milter sessions accepted. Default: 100.
.TP
.B limits.milter_timeout
Maximum duration, in seconds, a single milter session may remain open.
Default: 30.
.TP
.B limits.http_timeout
Maximum duration, in seconds, for a single HTTP request/response
cycle. Default: 30.
.TP
.B limits.inline_max_size
Maximum size, in bytes, of a presentation\-inline asset (a
.BR cid: \-referenced
image inside
.BR multipart/related )
eligible for the policy engine's protective downgrade to a pass
action, when its detected type is
.B image/*
and it is within this bound. Default: 262144 (256 KiB).
.SS "storage"
Attachment object storage backend. Exactly one of the
.B s3
or
.B fs
subsections is used, chosen by
.BR driver .
.TP
.B storage.driver
One of
.B s3
or
.BR fs .
Default:
.BR fs .
.SS "storage.s3"
Used when
.B storage.driver
is
.BR s3 .
.TP
.B storage.s3.endpoint
S3\-compatible service endpoint URL, e.g.
.RI \(dq https://s3.amazonaws.com \(dq
or
.RI \(dq http://localhost:9000 \(dq
for MinIO. Empty means use the AWS SDK's default region resolution.
.TP
.B storage.s3.region
AWS region, or a placeholder such as
.RI \(dq us-east-1 \(dq
for services (e.g. MinIO) that ignore it but require a value. Must not
be empty when
.B driver
is
.BR s3 .
.TP
.B storage.s3.bucket
Name of the S3 bucket objects are stored in. Must not be empty when
.B driver
is
.BR s3 .
.TP
.B storage.s3.access_key ", " storage.s3.secret_key
Static credentials. If either is empty, the AWS SDK's default
credential chain (environment, shared config, instance/task role) is
used instead. Never printed in logs or error messages; typically set
via
.RI \(dq ${ENV_VAR} \(dq
substitution rather than written inline.
.TP
.B storage.s3.path_style
Boolean. Forces path\-style bucket addressing
.RI ( https://endpoint/bucket/key
instead of
.RI https://bucket.endpoint/key ),
required by MinIO and most non\-AWS S3\-compatible services. Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B storage.s3.sse
Server\-side encryption applied to objects on put. One of
.RB \(dq\(dq
(no SSE header sent),
.RB \(dq AES256 \(dq
(SSE\-S3), or
.RB \(dq aws:kms \(dq
(SSE\-KMS). Default:
.RB \(dq\(dq .
.TP
.B storage.s3.sse_kms_key_id
KMS key ID/ARN to use when
.B sse
is
.RB \(dq aws:kms \(dq .
Ignored otherwise.
.SS "storage.fs"
Used when
.B storage.driver
is
.BR fs .
.TP
.B storage.fs.base_dir
Root directory under which all objects are stored. Created
automatically if missing; every object path is validated to resolve
inside it. Must not be empty when
.B driver
is
.BR fs .
Default:
.RI \(dq ./data/attachments \(dq .
.SS "database"
Metadata database backend (message/link/audit/token records).
.TP
.B database.driver
Only
.B sqlite
is supported in this build.
.TP
.B database.path
Filesystem path to the SQLite database file. The containing directory
must exist and be writable; the file itself is created on first run if
missing. Must not be empty. Default:
.RI \(dq ./data/attachra.db \(dq .
.SS "links"
Link Engine fallback parameters, applied whenever a matched policy rule
(or its defaults) leaves a field unset.
.TP
.B links.default_ttl_seconds
Link lifetime, in seconds, used when a policy does not set
.BR ttl .
Must be positive. Default: 604800 (7 days).
.TP
.B links.default_max_downloads
Download budget used when a policy does not set
.BR max_downloads .
0 means unlimited. Must not be negative. Default: 0.
.TP
.B links.token_bytes
Number of
.B crypto/rand
bytes used to generate each link token. Must be at least 16 (128
bits). Default: 16.
.TP
.B links.default_retention_seconds
Storage retention, in seconds, used when a policy does not set
.BR retention .
0 means fall back to whichever TTL applies to the link. If set, must
not be shorter than
.BR links.default_ttl_seconds .
Default: 2592000 (30 days).
.SS "policy"
Attachment policy engine.
.TP
.B policy.path
Filesystem path to the policy YAML document (see
.I docs/architecture/policy-format-v1.md
in the source tree). Empty (the default) means no policy is loaded:
every attachment passes through unmodified. When non\-empty, the file
must parse and validate or the process fails to start. Default: empty.
.TP
.B policy.dry_run
Boolean. When true, the policy engine computes and logs every decision
as usual but always returns a pass action to the caller, so operators
can validate a new policy against live traffic before enforcing it. A
rule's own
.B then.dry_run
overrides this global default for matches of that rule. Default:
.BR false .
.SS "retention"
Background storage\-retention cleanup job.
.TP
.B retention.enabled
Boolean. Toggles the background cleanup loop. Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B retention.interval_seconds
How often a sweep pass runs, in seconds. Must be positive when
enabled. Default: 3600 (hourly).
.TP
.B retention.chunk_size
Maximum number of expired attachments fetched per database round trip
within a single sweep pass. Must be positive when enabled. Default:
200.
.SS "public_base_url"
.TP
.B public_base_url
Base URL embedded in every rewritten message's download link, e.g.
.RI \(dq https://mail.example.com \(dq .
Must be an absolute, well\-formed
.B http
or
.B https
URL with a host when set. Empty by default (no default value is
provided \(em a deployment configuring a policy that replaces
attachments must set this).
.SH DEFAULTS
The values shown above match
.RB \(dq config.Default() \(dq
in
.I internal/config/config.go
of the attachra source tree, which is the definitive source if this
page and the code ever disagree.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Every key above can be overridden by setting the corresponding
.B ATTACHRA_<SECTION>_<FIELD>
environment variable (uppercase, underscored), independent of any
.RI \(dq ${ENV_VAR} \(dq
substitution already applied to the file's own text. Only the keys
below are currently wired to an environment override; every other key
listed above can only be set via the YAML file itself:
.RS
.EX
ATTACHRA_LOG_LEVEL
ATTACHRA_LOG_FORMAT
ATTACHRA_MILTER_LISTEN
ATTACHRA_MILTER_FAILURE_MODE
ATTACHRA_HTTP_LISTEN
ATTACHRA_HTTP_RATE_LIMIT_PER_IP_PER_MINUTE
ATTACHRA_HTTP_RATE_LIMIT_GLOBAL_PER_MINUTE
ATTACHRA_PUBLIC_BASE_URL
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_DRIVER
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_S3_ENDPOINT
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_S3_REGION
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_S3_BUCKET
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_S3_ACCESS_KEY
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_S3_SECRET_KEY
ATTACHRA_STORAGE_FS_BASE_DIR
ATTACHRA_POLICY_PATH
ATTACHRA_POLICY_DRY_RUN
ATTACHRA_DATABASE_DRIVER
ATTACHRA_DATABASE_PATH
.EE
.RE
.B ATTACHRA_POLICY_DRY_RUN
accepts
.RB \(dq true \(dq
(case\-insensitive) or
.RB \(dq 1 \(dq ;
any other value is treated as false.
.SH EXAMPLE
.RS
.EX
log:
  level: info
  format: text

milter:
  listen: "inet:127.0.0.1:6785"
  failure_mode: open

http:
  listen: "127.0.0.1:8080"
  trusted_proxies:
    - "127.0.0.1/32"

public_base_url: "https://mail.example.com"

storage:
  driver: fs
  fs:
    base_dir: /var/lib/attachra/files

database:
  driver: sqlite
  path: /var/lib/attachra/attachra.db

policy:
  path: /etc/attachra/policy.yaml
  dry_run: false
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/attachra/attachra.yaml
Default location on a package install; passed explicitly via
.B \-\-config
by the packaged systemd unit (this file is not searched for
automatically).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR attachra (1),
.BR attachractl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
The Attachra Project <https://attachra.org>.
