.TH ATTACHRA 1 "2026-07-15" "attachra" "Attachra Manual"
.SH NAME
attachra \- self\-hosted attachment policy engine (Postfix milter server)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B attachra
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.br
.B attachra version
.br
.B attachra policy validate
.RB [ \-\-strict ]
.I file
.br
.B attachra setup
.RB [ \-\-config\-dir
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-non\-interactive
.RI [ flags ...]]
.br
.B attachra audit export
.RB [ \-\-from
.IR timestamp ]
.RB [ \-\-to
.IR timestamp ]
.RB [ \-\-type
.IR type ]
.br
.B attachra link hold
.B \-\-actor
.I actor
.I link\-id
.br
.B attachra link unhold
.B \-\-actor
.I actor
.I link\-id
.br
.B attachra link revoke
.B \-\-actor
.I actor
.RI ( link\-id " | " \-\-message\-id " " id " | " \-\-sender " " address )
.br
.B attachra token create
.B \-\-name
.I name
.B \-\-role
.I role
.B \-\-actor
.I actor
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B attachra
is the single static binary that runs the Attachra attachment policy
engine. Run without a subcommand, it starts the long\-lived server
process: a Postfix milter adapter that intercepts outbound mail, a MIME
rewrite pipeline that applies the active policy document to each
attachment, an S3\-compatible or local filesystem storage backend, and
an HTTP adapter that serves the personal download links attachments are
replaced with. Configuration is read from a single YAML file; see
.BR attachra.yaml (5).
.PP
Every attachment stays in the message unmodified unless a policy rule
matches it. If Attachra itself fails (crash, timeout, bug), the default
.I open
failure mode delivers the message unchanged rather than blocking mail
(see \fBmilter.failure_mode\fR in \fBattachra.yaml\fR(5)).
.PP
In addition to the server, several operator subcommands are provided
that talk directly to the local metadata store and do not require the
server to be running: \fBpolicy validate\fR, \fBaudit export\fR,
\fBlink hold\fR/\fBunhold\fR/\fBrevoke\fR and \fBtoken create\fR. These
subcommands still read \fB\-\-config\fR (or the default search path) to
locate the metadata database and other settings, but they exit
immediately after the operation instead of starting the milter/HTTP
listeners.
.PP
\fBsetup\fR is the odd one out: it does not read an existing
configuration at all \(em its entire purpose is to
.B create
one, either by interactive wizard or from flags, before Attachra has
ever been configured on this host.
.PP
For remote administration of an already\-running instance over its REST
API instead, see
.BR attachractl (1).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config " file"
Path to the YAML configuration file. If omitted, built\-in defaults are
used (see \fBattachra.yaml\fR(5) \(dq DEFAULTS \(dq).
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version, commit and build date, then exit 0. Equivalent to
the
.B version
subcommand below.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "attachra version"
Prints
.RI \(dq attachra " " VERSION " (commit " COMMIT ", built " DATE )\(dq
to stdout and exits 0.
.SS "attachra policy validate [\-\-strict] file"
Loads and validates the policy document at
.I file
(see \fBdocs/architecture/policy-format-v1.md\fR in the source tree for
the format) without starting the server or touching the metadata
store. Prints a one\-line summary plus any warnings to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Treat warnings as failures: exit 2 instead of 0 when the policy is
valid but produced one or more warnings.
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR valid (no warnings, or warnings without
\fB\-\-strict\fR); \fB1\fR invalid policy or malformed command line;
\fB2\fR valid with warnings under \fB\-\-strict\fR.
.SS "attachra setup [\-\-config\-dir dir] [\-\-force] [\-\-non\-interactive] [flags...]"
First\-run wizard that generates a working
.I attachra.yaml
/
.I policy.yaml
pair under
.B \-\-config\-dir
(and an
.I attachra.env
sidecar, if S3 credentials are given), so a new operator does not have
to hand\-author YAML from the packaged templates in
.I deploy/deb/etc/
to get started. Every generated file is verified with the exact same
validation
.B attachra \-\-config ...
applies at startup before it is committed to disk; on any failure
(including that verification), nothing already written is left
half\-done \(em a freshly created file is removed, and a file that
existed before this run (a
.B \-\-force
re\-run) is restored to its exact prior content.
.PP
With no
.BR \-\-non\-interactive ,
.B setup
prompts interactively for every answer, in this fixed order: sender
domain(s), public base URL, storage driver (and its
endpoint/region/bucket/credentials for
.BR s3 ),
HTTP and milter listen addresses (each probed for availability, with a
warning and a retry\-or\-keep\-anyway choice if the address looks busy),
failure mode, and dry\-run. Interactive mode requires a real terminal on
stdin; a piped or redirected stdin is rejected with a message pointing
at
.BR \-\-non\-interactive .
Any of the answer flags below may still be given alongside interactive
mode to pre\-fill (not silently apply) that prompt's default.
.PP
With
.BR \-\-non\-interactive ,
no prompts are shown at all; every required answer must come from the
flags below, or the command fails listing exactly which ones are
missing.
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-dir " dir"
Directory to write
.IR attachra.yaml / policy.yaml
(and
.IR attachra.env ,
if S3 credentials are given) into. Default:
.IR /etc/attachra .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite an existing
.IR attachra.yaml / policy.yaml
in
.BR \-\-config\-dir .
Without it, setup refuses to run at all if any of those files (or
.IR attachra.env )
already exist, before prompting for anything.
.TP
.B \-\-non\-interactive
Skip prompts entirely; every answer must be supplied via the flags
below.
.TP
.BI \-\-domains " domains"
Comma\-separated sender domain(s) to process. Required with
.BR \-\-non\-interactive .
The generated policy replaces attachments only for mail from these
domains; every other sender passes through unmodified.
.TP
.BI \-\-public\-base\-url " url"
Public base URL embedded in download links, e.g.
.IR https://mail.example.com .
Required with
.BR \-\-non\-interactive .
.TP
.BI \-\-storage " driver"
Storage driver:
.B fs
or
.BR s3 .
Default:
.BR fs .
.TP
.BI \-\-fs\-base\-dir " dir"
.B fs
driver: base directory for stored attachments. Default:
.IR /var/lib/attachra/files .
.TP
.BI \-\-s3\-endpoint " url"
.B s3
driver: S3\-compatible endpoint URL. Required for
.BR \-\-storage=s3 .
.TP
.BI \-\-s3\-region " region"
.B s3
driver: region. Required for
.BR \-\-storage=s3 .
.TP
.BI \-\-s3\-bucket " bucket"
.B s3
driver: bucket name. Required for
.BR \-\-storage=s3 .
.TP
.BI \-\-s3\-access\-key " key"
.B s3
driver: access key. Written to
.IR <config\-dir>/attachra.env ,
never to
.IR attachra.yaml ;
leave blank to use the AWS SDK's default credential chain.
.TP
.BI \-\-s3\-secret\-key " key"
.B s3
driver: secret key. Same handling as
.BR \-\-s3\-access\-key .
.TP
.B \-\-s3\-path\-style
.B s3
driver: use path\-style bucket addressing, required by MinIO and most
non\-AWS S3 services. Only consulted with
.BR \-\-non\-interactive ;
interactive mode always asks this as its own yes/no prompt instead
(see the note under
.B \-\-dry\-run
below, which has the identical reason).
.TP
.BI \-\-http\-listen " addr"
Download server listen address. Default:
.IR 127.0.0.1:18080 .
.TP
.BI \-\-milter\-listen " addr"
Milter listen address, Postfix syntax. Default:
.IR inet:127.0.0.1:6785 .
.TP
.BI \-\-failure\-mode " mode"
Milter failure resolution:
.B open
or
.BR closed .
Default:
.BR open .
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Start the policy in dry\-run mode: log would\-be decisions without
replacing attachments (recommended). Default:
.BR true .
Like
.BR \-\-s3\-path\-style ,
only consulted with
.BR \-\-non\-interactive :
a boolean flag's unset zero value is indistinguishable from an
explicit
.BR false ,
so interactive mode always asks this as its own yes/no prompt (default
.BR yes )
instead of reading this flag at all \(em unlike every string\-valued
flag above, which interactive mode DOES use to pre\-fill (not silently
apply) its corresponding prompt's default.
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR success; \fB1\fR error (invalid or missing
answers, an existing config without \fB\-\-force\fR, a write or
verification failure, or malformed command line).
.SS "attachra audit export [\-\-from ts] [\-\-to ts] [\-\-type type]"
Streams every audit event matching the given filter to stdout as JSON
Lines (one compact JSON object per line, in ascending order), reading
directly from the local metadata database configured by
\fB\-\-config\fR. Intended for ingestion into an external immutable
store or SIEM. Output is streamed, not buffered, so memory use does not
grow with audit log size.
.TP
.BI \-\-from " timestamp"
Only include events at or after this RFC 3339 timestamp.
.TP
.BI \-\-to " timestamp"
Only include events strictly before this RFC 3339 timestamp.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " type"
Only include events of this type (e.g. \fBdownload\fR, \fBrevoke\fR,
\fBerror\fR, \fBtoken_change\fR).
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR success; \fB1\fR error (bad filter value, store
failure, or malformed command line).
.SS "attachra link hold \-\-actor actor link\-id"
.PD 0
.SS "attachra link unhold \-\-actor actor link\-id"
.PD
Sets (\fBhold\fR) or clears (\fBunhold\fR) the legal\-hold flag on a
single download link identified by its store\-assigned ID. A link
under hold cannot be revoked (see \fBlink revoke\fR below) until it is
unheld again.
.TP
.BI \-\-actor " actor"
Required. Identity of the operator performing this action, recorded in
the audit log (the CLI has no HTTP\-auth principal to attribute the
action to automatically).
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR success; \fB1\fR error (link not found, malformed
command line).
.SS "attachra link revoke \-\-actor actor (link\-id | \-\-message\-id id | \-\-sender address)"
Revokes one or more download links immediately, so any further
download attempt against them fails. Exactly one of a positional
.IR link\-id ,
.B \-\-message\-id
or
.B \-\-sender
must be given:
.TP
.I link\-id
Revoke exactly one link by its store\-assigned ID.
.TP
.BI \-\-message\-id " id"
Revoke every link belonging to the given message ID.
.TP
.BI \-\-sender " address"
Revoke every link belonging to every message sent by the given address.
.TP
.BI \-\-actor " actor"
Required, same meaning as for \fBlink hold\fR/\fBunhold\fR above.
.PP
A link currently under legal hold is refused rather than revoked; in
the \fB\-\-message\-id\fR/\fB\-\-sender\fR cascade modes, held links are
skipped and reported separately instead of aborting the whole
operation. Clear the hold first with \fBlink unhold\fR.
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR success (even if some cascade members were held
and skipped); \fB1\fR error (link not found, all targets held, or
malformed command line).
.SS "attachra token create \-\-name name \-\-role role \-\-actor actor"
Mints a new API bearer token directly against the metadata store,
without a running server. This is the bootstrap path for the very
first API token: the REST API itself is deny\-by\-default and cannot
mint its own first credential. The raw secret is printed to stdout
.B exactly once
and is never persisted (only its hash is stored) \(em capture it
immediately, e.g.:
.RS
.EX
attachra token create \-\-name ci \-\-role viewer \-\-actor alice > token.secret
.EE
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-name " name"
Required. Operator\-chosen label for the token.
.TP
.BI \-\-role " role"
Required. One of \fBadmin\fR, \fBviewer\fR or \fBauditor\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-actor " actor"
Required, same meaning as for \fBlink hold\fR/\fBunhold\fR/\fBrevoke\fR
above.
.PP
Listing and revoking existing tokens is done through the REST API (or
.BR attachractl (1)'s
.B token list
/
.B token revoke
subcommands) instead of this CLI, which exists only to break the
chicken\-and\-egg problem of the very first token.
.PP
Exit status: \fB0\fR success; \fB1\fR error (invalid role, store
failure, or malformed command line).
.SH EXIT STATUS
When run as the server (no subcommand), \fBattachra\fR exits \fB0\fR on
a clean shutdown (SIGINT/SIGTERM), \fB1\fR on a startup or runtime
failure, and \fB2\fR if the global command line itself could not be
parsed. Each subcommand defines its own exit status; see
.B COMMANDS
above.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reloads the policy file configured by \fBpolicy.path\fR from disk
without restarting. A failed reload logs the error and keeps the
previously active policy in effect. Sent by
.RB \(dq "systemctl reload attachra" \(dq
under the packaged systemd unit.
.TP
.BR SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Begin a graceful shutdown: both the milter and HTTP listeners stop
accepting new connections and drain in\-flight work before the process
exits.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Every configuration key can be overridden with an
.B ATTACHRA_
\-prefixed environment variable; see
.BR attachra.yaml (5)
.B ENVIRONMENT
for the full list. \fB${VAR}\fR placeholders inside the YAML file
itself are also expanded against the process environment before
parsing, independent of the \fBATTACHRA_*\fR override mechanism \(em
this is the recommended way to keep secrets (S3 keys, etc.) out of the
world\-readable configuration file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/attachra/attachra.yaml
Default configuration file location on a package install (see
.BR attachra.yaml (5)).
Not read automatically \(em must be passed via \fB\-\-config\fR (the
packaged systemd unit does this).
.TP
.I /etc/attachra/policy.yaml
Default policy document location referenced from \fBattachra.yaml\fR's
\fBpolicy.path\fR key on a package install.
.TP
.I /etc/attachra/attachra.env
Optional, root\-only (0600) environment file read by systemd before
starting the process, for secrets referenced from \fBattachra.yaml\fR
via \fB${ENV_VAR}\fR substitution.
.TP
.I /var/lib/attachra/attachra.db
Default SQLite metadata database path on a package install.
.TP
.I /var/lib/attachra/files
Default local filesystem storage directory on a package install (only
used when \fBstorage.driver\fR is \fBfs\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR attachractl (1),
.BR attachra.yaml (5),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
The Attachra Project <https://attachra.org>.
